I wanted to say a few words about endangered
languages, but [first]... hey, I finally got
a copy of the 千字文.
Talking to 101 people who work in bookstores
who have never heard of that book finally
came to a conclusion.
I exaggerate only slightly.
Uh, arright...
You know, I had an interesting conversation
just yesterday with someone whose first language
is Hokkien.
I guess I could say...
I could make two lists of languages, one being
languages that I have studied, and one being
languages that I tried to study.
On that second list, I would include Hokkien.
I tried to study that language in formal university
programs.
I spoke to professors in England, Canada,
the U.S., and, of course, in Taiwan.
To make a long story short, it turned out
to be impossible.
Uh...
I did enough research on it to be annoying.
Some of the illustrations and diagrams from
that work are posted on my blog and they actually
still get a lot of readers (compared to anything
I've ever worked on) because there are a lot
of people who grew up speaking that language
and when they search on the internet they
barely find a trace of it, especially if they're
searching in English, of course.
It is a language that's disappearing.
It is a language that is in danger now.
Just yesterday I had a conversation with someone
whose parents and grandparents spoke it as
their native language, but she, in the younger
generation, grew up being educated only in
the language that had a chance of making money,
and those are primarily (1) standard Chinese
(a.k.a. "Modern Standard Mandarin"), and (2)
English.
I was having the conversation with her in
Like many discussions of endangered languages,
it started with her having the outlook that,
"No, this language wasn't endangered".
[Insisting that] it was still spoken in many
places, and that if I knew more about it,
I would realize that it is still vibrant in
this place and that place and so on.
After just a few minutes, she completely switched
her perspective on the matter, and was agreeing
with me, that yes, this language was endangered,
and yes it would probably disappear completely
within the next 100 years, as her grandparents'
generation disappeared.
When I showed her the illustrations from my
own website (from my blog) she remarked with
amazement many times, she had never seen the
language written.
She had never seen it studied.
She had never seen it formally taught.
And I said to her, very simply, if you have
a language that nobody is teaching, that nobody
is reading, that nobody is writing, that's
[why] it will disappear in the next 100 years.
You have, very simply, all the ingredients
there for language extinction.
But you also have the awareness, on her part,
as someone whose family [had been] traditionally
native speakers of this language, she has
the awareness that they made a choice: [her]
family and, more broadly, [her] people, chose
(not in a circumstance of being conquered
and forced at the end of a bayonet, the way
the British Empire operated, in Australia,
in Canada, and in many other places in the
world), but they made a choice to switch to
languages that had a better chance of earning
money for the younger generation's future.
[This is] a conscious and deliberate choice
to let the language fade out of use in their
own family.
And, um, she remarked several times that it
was sad, and she had never thought about it
before.
She had never thought about how sad it was
that she was herself a member of the last
generation to know this language --and her
own ability in the language, of course, is
limited to a few isolated words and phrases.
And she's going to witness this fade out into
nothing.
And whatever significance the language had
for the history of the world, whatever potential
it could have had for the future, is going
to fade out.
But a language like Min-nan (a language like
Hokkien) is at the opposite extreme from languages
that are indigenous to Canada (probably [we
could also say the same of] languages that
are indigenous to Australia and other examples).
Um, y'know there was a time when Hokkien was
actually a very active international language.
It still has radio programs giving the news
and conversation.
It still has television news.
In the very recent past, and still today,
they have some pop songs, but they used to
have movies, music, love-songs.
It was a pop language, and it crossed international
frontiers.
It's definitely a language that united a whole
semi-circle of the Chinese-speaking world,
from the port of Xiamen down to Malaysia,
Taiwan, Singapore.
Singapore used to have a huge population speaking
Min-nan, and today it has really disappeared.
Singapore made a conscious decision to transition
to just standard Chinese (and English) among
the [ethnically] Chinese population.
You know, for a language with the sort of
history that Min-nan has, the decision (consciously-made)
to switch to other languages, both at the
level of the individual family and at the
level of local governments like Singapore,
and, y'know, with policies that are not carried
out with swords and guns (not through brute
force), that's very, very different from the
historical experience of the Cree or Ojibwe.
Within Canada when I spoke to people whose
heritage was Cree, Cree was maybe the only
language large enough for people to have that
[same] delusion, that "No, there are plenty
of people who speak Cree fluently".
"No, if you say it's endangered, you're wrong,
you don't know what you're talking about."
And very often if you just talked to them
about it for a couple of minutes they would
make the same flip, they would make the transition
to agreeing with you, realizing, "No, look,
I just never thought about it before".
"Yeah, the language really is in danger."
And they would think about all the things
that a vibrant language would have going for
it, and what's missing for Cree, and what
the future might hold.
But Cree is big enough and spread out enough
geographically that some people will refuse
[to accept this], they'll just get dug in
and say, "No!", and they'll point to how much
of the map in theory has Cree heritage, and
say "Cree is strong and vibrant and the language
can't be disappearing from the world".
I've never had that experience even with speakers
of Anishinaabe (a language we call Ojibwe
in English), maybe because Ojibwe is spread
out on both sides of the Canadian-U.S. border,
maybe because so much of Ojibwe is spoken
in areas that are more densely populated,
in terms of contact with English.
I don't know what the factors are, [but] I've
always found that they're much more aware
of how perilous and delicate the situation
of their language is, how close it is to extinction.
I have written a bit about language extinction
before, I wrote an informal article in a very
informal publication, a sort of journal for
endangered language researchers and enthusiasts,
and so on.
One of the things I emphasized in that article
(which may seem like an unusual or unpopular
point to make) is that when you're researching
these endangered languages you have to respect
that choice, when you meet people who have
made the choice.
I'm not saying (by any means) that native
Cree speakers had a free choice to switch
to English, although you will meet individuals
who will tell you that they did.
They'll say, "Yeah, you know, my grandparents
spoke Cree, my parents spoke Cree, but I decided
I only wanted to study English, I wanted to
go to university, I wanted to get ahead",
and they'll sometimes tell you that they have
a brother or sister who cared more about traditional
religion, traditional language, tradition
in general.
Some people, once in a while you meet people
who consciously made [this] decision.
So I think the role of the outsider (of a
researcher, even of a political activist)
can never be seeing the future of the language
as an obligation for people who happen to
be born into those circumstances.
I think the tremendously important thing is
to facilitate the minority of people who are
passionate about creating a future for their
native language.
If, hypothetically, there were only 2% of
Cree people in all of Canada who wanted to
work hard to create a future for the Cree
language, it would be imperative, it would
be tremendously important to facilitate the
efforts made by those 2% of people, and --even
at the level of social networking-- to get
them to meet each-other and have conferences
and co-operate and collaborate, because [that]
2% [and] their work will absolutely determine
whether or not any future generation (whether
it's 2% or 10% or 50%) has the option to participate
in that language, that heritage, that culture.